Happy New Year! Welcome to Padmasamyaling, the Venerable Kherpmo Rinpoches' Monastery and Retreat
Center in New York.
We are doing the 8th Morning Dawn webcast, and today we will be discussing the chapter "The Power
of Compassion" from the Venerable Khemper Rinpoches book, "The Buddhist Path".
First, we will just do our usual opening prayers, and then we will go into the discussion. Thanks!
[Singing in Tibetan]
So this chapter 8 of "The Buddhist Path" is mainly going over the story of the great master Asanga,
and so maybe you thought Amanda would just kind of overview this story.
So then after that, we will go into these main topic points of discussion in this group.
So this is the chapter on "The Power of Compassion", and basically the Rinpoches start out by
talking about how compassion is the most powerful tool for overcoming our karmic obscurations,
and also for overcoming obstacles to enlightenment, so compassion being so important.
And then they go into this story about Asanga, who is a famous Indian scholar, about 500 years
after the Buddha's time.
And he was really very learned, and he still had many questions and sort of doubts that he wasn't
getting resolved,
so he decided to go on a retreat, do practice on Maitreya, Buddha Maitreya, future Buddha.
So he went into retreat, and he was there for about 3 years, doing a lot of retreat on Buddha Mait
reya,
and then after those 3 years he didn't have any signs really of having gotten to meet Maitreya,
which he really wanted, so then he decided to leave retreat.
So he was leaving retreat, and the first thing he encountered was an old man, and this man was
rubbing an iron rod with silk, a piece of silk,
and he was trying to make a needle out of this iron rod.
And so Asanga saw this and really just realized, wow, what patience, this is extraordinary, the
patience this man has to do this.
I can continue my retreat, so then he decided to go back into retreat.
He went into retreat for 3 more years, and again he had some dreams of Maitreya, but he was really
longing to meet Maitreya, and he didn't.
And so he left again after, so now that's 6 years, and he was leaving, and this time he was looking
and he saw a pool of water and rocks,
and he saw like where this one drops of water were falling on a rock and created a hole.
Just slowly, a drop by drop, this hole had been created in a rock, and he realized, oh wow, so much
time, you know,
but look what can be done after with just diligence, and he says, okay, I'm going to go back into
retreat.
So he went back into retreat again for 3 more years.
Still during this time he continued to have more dreams and positive signs of Maitreya,
but then still Maitreya didn't appear to him, or at least he didn't get to ask the questions that
he wanted to ask Maitreya.
So he left again, and this time he saw something else, he saw this rock that had become shiny from
a bird,
I guess like rubbing its wings up against this rock, and again like thinking how much time that
must take for a bird's wings to create a shiny rock.
He thought, wow, you know, I could take some more time and keep trying, so he went back in again
for 3 more years,
and still he didn't have, he didn't meet Maitreya. So this is 12 years of retreat.
And then after that he left, and this time he was going down the mountain, and he encountered a dog
that was severely injured and wounded,
and had like I think just like the bottom half of his body was kind of his skin had been eaten, and
he had maggots and fleas on his skin.
And so Asanga saw this and felt such compassion for this dog, contemplating the Buddha and how the
compassion of the Buddha,
he decided, you know, I'm going to try to act similarly and help this dog.
And so he realized he couldn't use his hands, because he'd injured the fleas or the maggots, and so
he used his tongue.
And he went down, you know, and started to approach the dog to lick the maggots off the dog's skin.
And immediately his tongue kept hitting the ground, so he wasn't actually getting the dog.
And when he looked up, he saw Buddha Maitreya. So, you know, illustrating that after so much time,
you know, he did get to see him.
And Maitreya said, "The only reason I've been with you all this time, and the only reason you're
only seeing me now is because due to the power of your compassion for this dog."
So illustrating that point of just how powerful compassion is.
And then at the very end, Rinpoche has concluded the chapter about how really essential compassion
is, that without it, our practice is rotten.
So the first main topic point takes place on page 41, the first paragraph, and page 43, the last
paragraph.
It says, "Pure compassion has the power to remove all karmic obscurations and obstacles to
enlightenment.
As inner wisdom is uncovered, your understanding of relative and absolute truth increases as you
progress towards enlightenment."
The Buddha said many times that compassion is the most powerful tool for removing endurance and
increasing wisdom.
Guru Padmasambhava taught that without compassion, Dharma practice will not bear fruit, and in fact
, without compassion, your practice will become rotten.
So my question was just, "What makes compassion so special? Why compassion?"
You know, I heard a story this weekend, actually the woman was telling me this story.
She had lost her daughter in a car accident about 12 years ago, and right after that, she couldn't
do Christmas.
Couldn't do Christmas at all, particularly for anyone who's lost a child, holidays become a very
hard time because they have a lot of memories.
So she didn't bring out the tree at all, couldn't do any of the different things.
They actually just went to Virgita. It was as good as far as ways they could.
And over the years, she just couldn't really bring herself around to do it. It was too painful, too
many memories.
And she has two other daughters who are now in their teens, I think.
And this year, her husband had decided to get this really big Christmas tree.
I guess for him, he'd finally come around and said, "You know, it's time he got a 12-foot Christmas
tree, fill the living room."
And her daughters were having this wonderful time finding Christmas ornaments, putting them up on
the tree,
dancing around the garlands, dressing up the tree.
And at one point, they had realized that they didn't have enough ornaments to fill up the tree.
And they said, "Mom, we don't have enough ornaments." She said, "Actually, we do. They're up in the
attic.
They're the ornaments we had from when your sister was still alive. You go up and get them."
And the thing that made the story so interesting was the fact that she was saying, afterwards, she
's like,
she could not bring herself to do that on her own. She couldn't revisit that pain for her own
benefit.
But when she saw her daughters having such a wonderful time, that was that thing that moved her.
It's like, okay, it's okay to go back there. I can have patience with that. I can be there with
that pain.
I can go back through that for other people.
It reminded me a lot of the story. Actually, it was funny. I didn't even realize the 12 years part
lined up, too.
Because it had been 12 years since she had had a Christmas. But it's that willingness to revisit
things,
to go through things for other people. That's what compassion can do. Really move you beyond
yourself.
It was just a story that reminded me of this chapter.
It seems like compassion is, too, that aspect. Like earlier, we were talking about loving kindness.
And all of this is relating back to bodhicitta, of course, but the absolute bodhicitta,
and then our inspiration and our vision, and just how compassion is kind of based on loving
kindness,
but the way compassion is actually, maybe when we begin to actualize, to actually make an outward,
we have that love, and we have not only a love, but a desire to help,
and a desire to comfort beings and to uplift their minds and hearts.
It's kind of, in a way, maybe it's related to that actualizing power, too, as far as bodhicitta.
And it, of course, is based on thinking of other ascent. I mean, I think that's definitely related
to that, too.
You know, a big thing, or something that struck me very strongly,
that I've heard from His Holiness Dala Lama before,
is he said, if we really take, or he was saying, genuine compassion is when not only we have a
natural sympathy
for other beings' suffering, but we actually take responsibility to help end that suffering,
to do what we really can that's available to us, to take responsibility to actually remove that
suffering.
And it's really, the emphasis point that struck me was it really strongly, it's not just a wish,
there is this aspiring bodhicitta, for sure, but then it really, we have to actually engage it,
we have to, in a sense, make ourselves vulnerable, and to go into an unfamiliar thing,
and to really put ourselves at risk, in a way, just like in this story with the dog,
and just this overwhelming concern for this dog, and like, a song is probably going to get sick,
and he's going to get mauled by this dog, you know, when he goes down to try to save the maggots.
But it's the responsibility, it's not just a feel good, I'm with you, but I'm not really going to
do much
to actually help you, kind of a sympathy.
You can see there, too, like the way that relates back to the six-fire mitas,
which are now part of the concepts and things, but the way the six-fire mitas are like that,
as far as actualizing that intention and thinking of others, you know, in a way, if you think,
you know, also a song that was also, he wasn't just thinking about the dog,
he was thinking about like the maggots that were in the dog, and I mean, of course,
but just so there's like all of that generosity, there's that mindfulness,
and trying out what's the most appropriate way to fix this situation, you know,
like really keeping like a wider vision of everything involved in it.
I mean, and again, I mean, obviously, he had all the patience to just get him to that point,
but then also even with that, even being willing to deal with, you know,
cutting his flesh and taking the maggots out with his tongue, and all these things,
and they're just ways to relate him back, but just the way the six-fire mitas really,
are that part of the way of engaging and really developing our footage into, you know.
I mean, like I was, like about, along the same lines of everything that people have said,
like, why is compassion important?
Like, well, if we look at the form of measurables,
you know, beings have happiness and a cause of happiness, that's the love component.
May they be free from suffering and the causes of suffering.
So I think one of the essential points here is, everyone is kind of suffering,
you know, like we're in the difficult circumstances, like,
and from the practical perspective, if everyone has been our mothers or our fathers
or our dear friend and benefited us countless times forever, you know,
I mean, that's what the teachings say.
And the only thing they want is happiness and to not have suffering,
but yet they continuously, I mean, by then, we, you know,
continuously engage in all these activities that are actually the causes of suffering.
So it's like, everyone keeps doing things that just brings more suffering,
but yet everyone wants to be happy, and it's just such a, it's like, in a certain sense,
it's just such a poignant circumstance to see that, like,
and that's, again, I keep quoting this, the words of my perfect teacher Kimpo Nachum,
he wrote a commentary on it, and he said, what is the cause of happiness?
It's the belief that in karma, so, you know, that's the vehicle of gods and humans,
which means you do virtuous things and therefore you obtain higher rebirths.
That's the, that's the, basically the Pratimonta, I mean, that's the gods and humans.
The second one is the wish to, the determination to attain liberation.
That's more like the Pratimonta, the Shravatayana, where you're like,
I really want to be free from samsara for myself.
And then the final one is, it's bodhicitta.
It's like, may everyone have this, may everyone, you know, enjoy the,
be free from the causes of suffering.
But, I don't know, it just seems like, along these lines,
where the cult of any requirement does and everything,
if your dearest mother and your kindest friend is just like,
once you see clearly the situation of like, how everyone wants to be happy,
but yet how everyone is just constantly doing things that like,
is the cause of unhappiness.
And just, not just now, but like, long into the future.
Then, I mean, compassion is like, that's not just a negative aspect.
I'm like, you could emphasize it and it could be really, you know, upsetting,
but in a certain sense, it is upsetting when you realize it.
It's just like, you know, well, everyone wants to be free from suffering,
but it's never going to happen.
And like Japa said, like, those four things, like,
would you take it upon yourself, you know, like,
wouldn't it be great if they were free from suffering, you know?
Like, may they be free from suffering, that's the second aspiration.
I will be the one to do that.
I will be the one to leave them, that's the third aspiration.
And the fourth one is, praying to the three jewels and saying,
please, you know, like, help me, help all these beings,
like, be free from suffering.
Anyway, I know it's a little long-winded, but it's kind of a little overview.
And like Maitreya, I mean, at this one last point is like,
how good of a motivation is that?
That's the best motivation you could possibly have,
to free all beings from suffering.
And Maitreya walks by, there's other versions of this story too,
and he sees people doing something totally useless,
like, spending all their time to make a needle out of metal,
or like, wiping a boulder so that the sun can come in the house.
That's another version of the story.
And the sun is like, if they spend all this time
to do something so useless as just to make a needle,
and they are willing to do that for years and years and years,
well, what is my goal?
Is to totally bring all beings to complete enlightenment
so they'll never have experienced suffering again.
Then it's like, okay, they'll be willing to do that,
but I should be willing to spend a couple more years in retreat.
Sorry for the long-windedness.
I was wondering what practice it's like.
Asanga, he didn't have Vajrayana, right?
He was before Vajrayana?
I thought I saw him here, at least in the chapter it talked about,
he had received empowerment in teaching some of Maitreya,
before he went in, and so his three-year retreat,
or all of his four of his three-year retreats were on my trail.
So he probably had Vajrayana and did a visualizing?
I don't know the specifics.
But I was thinking the interesting thing,
and we already kind of touched on it, is that there's that aspect,
of course he was in retreat and doing,
I don't know what practices he was actually doing
besides that they were related to my trail,
but still he was in retreat.
And then this thing, this moment of compassion that purified him
was when he was, of course he was a practitioner,
but he was out of his retreat.
He was in the world, interacting directly within his experience
with this other actual being right before him on all levels.
And so the way that, of course based on his practice,
he had this pure love and compassion
that he just naturally did the best thing.
And he thought about it obviously too,
because he went to town and he bought the knife and came back.
But maybe there's that aspect too, where it's really actualized,
where not just, I mean I don't know the degree of his realization before,
but just that the power of actually engaging with the world,
with compassion, just that that's such a powerful thing too.
I mean it was then, that's the moment, I mean it could have been any time,
but that really brought out his compassion,
was actually seeing these beings,
especially the dog who was suffering.
And then it's just a point as far as that,
as far as there's that action,
the thing that really purified was this pure moment of compassion
that was tangible in a sense.
It wasn't just thinking about,
again I don't know what he was practicing in the cave,
but maybe we have that opportunity.
Of course our formal practice helps us really kind of touch home,
touch with the freshness and our intention
and expand our experience and deepen our meditation,
so that then as we move into the world and have our day-to-day life
and experiences and interactions,
we're deepening our practice then too,
based on that kind of nurturing.
And maybe a lot of that time is also kind of actualizing,
bringing our practice with everything that we're interacting with.
This is powerful too, especially with compassion.
In these circumstances maybe we have less control of what's going on.
We have a container with our formal practice,
which is really good to have and good to have that support.
But then also again there's this aspect when we move out into the world,
there isn't quite as much control over what we're going to encounter
or when we're interacting with other people and beings.
We're kind of more taking things as they come
and actualizing our practice then.
It benefits the other way as well.
Particularly when you see a lot of suffering out there
and you kind of come to this place where,
I guess from person to person it's different,
but when you've tried so many things,
when you've tried to be involved in these things,
but you don't have the tools that you gain from meditation
and you see all of these different ways
that people have used for years and years and years.
We know that war doesn't cause peace.
We know that anger doesn't bring out kindness.
We see how we've just been trying for countless aeons
and all these other methods.
It's like, well, what's actually going to work?
You want kindness, you have to bring that kindness.
Where am I going to find that kindness?
It has to come out of the practice.
It has to come out of that mindfulness.
It brings that fuel because you see how much pain is out there.
This isn't just for me.
If it's just for me, I'm going to go get a massage.
That's where my nice day comes from.
That's nice.
Maybe I'll go make a brownie or something like that.
That sounds like a nice way to spend the day,
but that brownie doesn't help someone else.
Maybe I'll be a little bit nicer after the massage,
but that's going to last a day.
What's that lasting thing that actually causes easing of suffering?
It's the fruit of the practice.
The post-meditation becomes that fuel
and that strong motivation to go back to the cushion.
Yes, definitely.
It just makes me think too about how they'll talk about
and the teachings about the importance of both removing suffering
and the cause of suffering.
What's the cause of suffering?
Ultimately ignorance is the most fundamental cause.
Just thinking about compassion in those terms,
this compassionate wish to alleviate suffering.
I can just say on my own, and when I experience someone else's compassion,
not only am I maybe relieved of whatever suffering
might have been there in that moment,
but there's almost just this inspiration
that comes from seeing the other person being so compassionate
that I think touches into that cause of suffering too.
So just reflecting on the power of compassion,
experiencing compassion on one's own side,
I think has that two-edged,
really both relieving that temporary suffering
and at least giving a glimpse into the power of,
"Wow, see what it's like to really act for others' benefit."
It's kind of at least starts to steer you there.
It depends on the action I think and what's happening.
The motivation could be so strong.
Just getting that taste and saying,
"Oh, I can offer this to other people."
You could be that peace for other people.
What's the prayer?
They say, "May I be the doctor in the medicine?"
That motivation really just kindles and sparks.
I was wondering about the meditation.
You can be kind of bringing up compassion,
but then I found that sometimes it just becomes a little bit of a lost thought.
You're maybe being very compassionate,
but it kind of stops being a meditation
and more starts being just thought after thought again.
What is the practice of keeping in a meditation on compassion
as opposed to just thinking on these compassionate thoughts kind of tumbling away?
Just personally, I'm thinking about all the Nuñje practices.
Both the visualizations I can think of
are that active attitude of either nourishing
or in one of the cases really being that light and really just beaming out.
So when you're thinking particularly in that case,
and a lot of the meditations we do, having that focus on the mandala,
focusing on your visualization itself and maintaining that,
and of course, like you said, sometimes your mind's going to go,
"Ooh, burger."
It's kind of like a side-track thing.
But if you keep bringing it back,
you see it and you just bring it back.
Are you saying that you attach the compassion to the visualization?
It's not like you have to attach it.
That attitude of you see the suffering
and you know what the suffering does,
and so that natural compassion arises.
You can't just tap on compassion to something it comes out of.
When you see the suffering, one of the things about being in samsara
is there's no end to the things we can view to give rise to compassion.
You can see every different type of neuroses.
You can see so much pain.
In all of these places, you can see people who look alone,
who seem distraught, all of these things,
if you allow yourself to see beyond yourself, they can all give rise to compassion.
So you don't have to create it.
You can easily just look, and compassion will spray its sparks.
So here, in terms of a technical answer,
if you look at the three frames,
the three noble ones, for every practice to be a complete practice,
there's a good beginning, good middle, and good end.
The good or noble beginning is always establishing the motivation,
which is refuge in bodhicitta.
So that's really connecting to that genuine love and compassion in ourselves,
and also seeing these objects of refuge,
buddhas and bodhisattvas that have totally fulfilled their own bodhicitta wish
and become buddhas.
So that's first, establishing the motivation.
And then second, it's actually the main practice.
What is it that we're actually continuing in the practice?
And that's always two-fold.
So in terms of talking more sutra mayana,
there's a samatha, or a concentration,
something we're holding in mind during a practice.
And then there's the vipashana, or the insight side.
And that's actually how flexible our awareness is
when we're holding that object.
So in a way, in vashriyana level,
that's called a creation stage and completion stage.
So in terms of meditation and not just getting distracted
in a tumbling sequence of thoughts or something,
just so compassionate and feels so good,
there's actually a way of applying that in the practice.
And so that's the main noble one, the noble middle.
And that always has some object we're concentrating on,
so a concentration aspect.
And then also staying in touch with our awareness,
or the more open emptiness aspect of our awareness when we do that.
And then the third noble one is always re-affirming
that motivation we started with.
So the noble conclusion is making dedication prayers
and aspiration prayers.
So all is a seamless way of bodhicitta
being in its more relative and absolute aspects,
and as a full package for the great Master Long Chambon,
and of course Kanchipalan Chavarabhichai
and Kanchipalan Chavarabhichai
have always teach in the context of the three noble ones.
And if we keep it in that context,
then it really does answer a lot of those questions
things kind of being murky, you know?
There's another way too that he's talked specifically of compassion,
of like, says visualize your mother, like Oi said,
Patra Rinpoche and Atisha said, visualize your mother.
And Jigme Lingpo said, visualize an animal at the verge of being slaughtered,
or a sentient being, right, in a really difficult situation.
And then bring up the fact that they've been so kind to you in the past.
You know, so vividly see them in front of you,
and then bring up all that kindness that they've done to you in the past.
And then think, oh, they've been so kind to me.
My mother did everything for me, or your father, or your friend.
And then think, oh, I should repay that, like I want to repay that,
because they're suffering, you know, they're on the verge of slaughter,
or they're in this difficult circumstances.
Trouble now, trouble in the bardo, trouble in the next life,
because of all the unvirtuous actions.
So this is so terrible, like,
and then you do that really vividly, and you have that wish really vividly,
and you bring up all those different types of suffering.
And then he says, you know, really cultivate the wish
that you yourself will personally take responsibility to bring them out of suffering.
And then apply that, not just to your mother, but to your brothers, your sisters, your friends,
everyone in the whole infinite vastness of space, all sentient beings.
You just extend more and more, and then when you get tired, you just rest.
And you're compassionate.
Like you've got a apostle aspect, you just let go.
And you always recognize, like Drago was saying too,
that they're not a for real solid sentient being, you know,
they say subject, object, action.
The three aspects are all empty.
You are empty, they're dreamlike, they're dreamlike,
and the compassion itself is dreamlike.
So anyway, that's one specific compassion technique.
There's just like three aspects of compassion,
which is, maybe it's what you just went through.
But that object where compassion for sentient beings is one.
And then there's thinking about the, on all phenomena.
Yes, that takes sentient beings as a focus.
Right, and then all phenomena, and how all phenomena is impermanent,
and there's nothing substantially existing.
And then the third aspect is that kind of no focus,
or like just the complete, maybe more like creation, or completion in a way.
It's non-conceptual compassion, that's just,
maybe if anyone has a more clear way of pointing them out.
It just says, one is like the suffering, so someone's suffering, they're sick.
Two is the, the second can also be said, the cause of their suffering,
like Amanda was saying, looking what the cause of why they're suffering is,
and having compassion at that level.
And then third is that natural unconditioned capacity for compassion we have
without when we're not restricting our mind in a tighter way,
or just the natural compassion that arises without limitation,
all pervasive compassion or something.
What was the middle one?
Compassion for the cause, or lie, was saying that compassion for phenomena.
So I think these are three different, they're like two systems looking at compassion.
Or a compassion that takes a dark lot as a focus, that's what it's sometimes translated as,
looking at the cause of suffering, and the dark light here can mean the dark world,
or phenomena, or reality, or whatever.
It's kind of amazing too, you know, we can, we definitely can start
with the seeing those very concrete things, and gross things,
and then the more you experience that compassion, the more fine-tuned your perception can be.
And then, you know, exactly that progression is.
You see the gross suffering, you know, when it comes to its full fruition,
then you see what's causing it.
And then you realize that, you know, your compassion doesn't have to be sparked by something,
but it's continually within awareness.
It's really quite beautiful, very profound.
There's no corner in samsara that's happy.
Notice there are three types of suffering, the suffering of suffering, suffering of change,
and all-pervasive suffering.
The very nature of everything coming together is it's constantly uncertain.
It always is going to break.
Like literally, there's nothing we ever do in the samsara framework that's happy.
It's always plagued with instability.
And then really, I think if we get sensitive to that, then the compassion starts really coming
strong,
and that's really too when more of this also like sinking into this emptiness
or more flexible, open aspects of compassion is important too.
Because we can't just be overly sensitive and really will kind of drown
in the sensitivity to the amazing suffering that's always happening.
But I think really this is, I mean, two things I thought, and the story is that if we look at a san
gha,
like he was just, I mean, one of the things I think that this chapter highlights is,
what didn't a sangha do right?
For 12 years, what was missing, you know?
Because he was this great scholar at Nalanda.
He did retreat for 12 years, which, I mean, serious, isolated retreat.
He had gotten the empowerments, he had gotten the instructions, like everything had lined up,
but so what was missing?
And it's really this view or that motivation in terms of Vajrayana context, like you said,
called the aspiration, so-called Hinayana aspiration, just my own freedom from suffering,
or freedom of all beings from their suffering, the Mahayana aspiration.
It just comes down to a view.
We can do so much work, put in so much time, and that view is really critical.
Both the philosophical way we orient and the heartfelt way that we really feel
and activate ourselves in that.
Because 12 years, obviously he's purifying and accumulating merit,
but it really comes down to the view in the end.
And so it says how we start, we really should look at how we start.
And at the same point, the second thing that was really strong,
as this is a teaching we hear every time, it's such a fundamental, basic, essential,
can't do anything without this teaching in Buddhism topic.
And like, it's the basics that make the practice what the practice is.
You can have all these other things, and without the core, you know,
it really doesn't work. It really can go really wrong.
Or it can just not really, you know, the result is we fizzle out, you know,
and we blame the Dharma, and we blame all these things, you know.
Without that basic core, you know.
That's the great secret of the Dharma, of the Mahayana.
The secret the Revachay say at the beginning, every time.
Cultivate compassion. Everyone's like, "Oh, I want the secret teachings!"
It's just like, "Here it is! Here's the secret!"
If you take that to heart, the whole thing will go totally smooth,
and that's the secret key that opens everything in the whole Dharma.
But if you don't, you'll always be on the sidelines.
So I just thought I'd mention, we've been talking so much,
I didn't give my little cue when we're close to the end,
but now we're really very close to the end.
So, in a way, without reading it, we've kind of been touching on this second point here,
in a part of how what really keeps our practice genuine and complete,
and not, you know, ensures that our practice isn't just going to kind of be a little rotten.
And Maitreya, it says Maitreya wasn't being uncompassionate.
It was really on Asanga's side, his vision, his view, his motivation was being held in a certain
way.
And he said, "Great Master, it should be really noted.
Asanga is like this pillar of... they say there's two main lineages.
Second turning is Nagarjuna, all this emptiness teachings of the Buddha.
Third turning on all these Buddha nature teachings is this Sangha and Maitreya.
It's like such a great enlightened being is what his legacy is.
It's like almost unparalleled, the two beautiful streams of Asanga and Nagarjuna together,
and this mind only, Madhyamaka, all comes together and we've been handed by Kaparambhiches,
because it's the same lineage that they hold.
It's such a great Master, almost unrivaled.
Asanga is so tremendously wonderful.
And it was this compassion that really, in the end, and then he saw purely,
is really the quintessential point of this third turning Buddha nature teachings.
What is the nature of everything?
It is compassion, and it expresses itself purely balanced ways.
And then you see Maitreya, see things, how Buddha sees things.
It's really, I mean, Sangha is amazing.
It kind of goes to like even before every teaching,
where Vrishas always bring up a course as part of our bodhicitta.
It's like those two motivations, the way that kind of relates back to,
but that purely motivation of like really contagion with the bodhicitta,
and then the motivation of like the vastness view of the purity of all, of everything,
and of the way those two work together.
And I was thinking another thing that just kind of, I thought of a few times as we were talking,
but just again kind of on this, the causes and results,
how Vrishas say many times in many different contexts,
but if we really like and aspire to like results,
then we have to love and nurture and connect like even more to the causes of those results.
And just the way that all relates back to these basic,
like really essential points that Vrishas are bringing up.
This makes me feel free.
For all of us in, never be tired of the virtuous activities
and beneficial activities for others.
Only be tired of all the negative things that you've done.
Only be tired of those.
And then never be tired of continually cultivating that because, you know,
the mind is so vast and it just keeps going and going and going
until you attain enlightenment.
If you're not enlightened, there's room to grow.
But for compassion-wise, you know.
And that's a good point.
I mean, just, it's so big and that's the nature of our minds too.
So there's no reason why we can't, you know, expand our view like we both have said.
All the best wishes for a wonderful new year, 2013.
Thank you.
(Singing in foreign language)
By this merit, may all obtain the missions,
may it defeat the enemy wrongdoing
from the strumming waves of earth, old age, sickness and death,
from the ocean of samsara, may it free all beings.
The precious bodhicitta and those without it may be generated,
and those who have it may never diminish,
but always continue increasing.
Thank you, thank you.